
Planet Profile
MARS
The Red Planet has a host of new robots investigating it

Across the gulf of space, no other planet has fired humanity’s imagination so much as the Red Planet, and it has frequently been associated with violence, war and death. To the ancient Sumerians it was Nergal, a god of war and plague who presided over the netherworld.
In Mesopotamia it was the ‘star of judgement of the fate of the dead’. The Chinese associated it with the element fire, while for the people of the Tiwi Islands off the coast of Australia the planet was one of the four wives of the Moon Man, who followed the path of the Sun Woman through the sky – the other wives were Mercury, Jupiter and Venus. The planet was a familiar sight to the astronomers of ancient Egypt, Babylonia, Rome – where Mars was the god of war – and Greece, where Aristotle noticed that the planet vanished behind the Moon during an occultation, proving it was farther away.
Following the invention of the telescope in the 17th century, Mars could be observed in greater detail, and Christiaan Huygens was able to observe Syrtis Major – which he thought was a plain, but we now know to be a volcano – the first surface feature seen on another planet, in 1659.
He was also able to measure Mars’ day length as 24 hours and 30 minutes – only seven minutes short of the true¬value. It would be another 312 years before a humanmade spacecraft would touch down on Martian soil, with the Soviet Union’s Mars 3 lasting 110 seconds on the surface and managing to transmit only part of a single image that showed no detail. There would be several more failures until NASA’s Viking 1 touched down in 1976 and operated for over six years.
Exploration of the planet has continued, and right now there are three operational rovers on its surface. Curiosity and Perseverance are from A the US, while Zhurong hails from China. These missions are the lucky ones. There have been a spate of failed missions from the USSR, US, UK and Japan – from rocket failures and solar panels failing to open to a mix-up between the units of measurement used in America and the metric system used by most of the rest of the world, which caused NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter to either burn up or skip off the Martian atmosphere and into deep space in 1999. 
Human missions to Mars have been a dream since the earliest days of space exploration. In 2004 the Vision for Space Exploration announced by US president George W. Bush called for a crewed mission to the Moon in 2020 as a stepping stone to Mars. In 2007 NASA administrator Michael D. Griffin said the agency aimed to put a person on Mars by 2037. The Journey to Mars plan, formulated by NASA in 2015, uses the ISS and an asteroid captured in 2020 to test deep-space habitation facilities. That phase is behind schedule, but the ISS phase is underway and set to last until 2024. Humans on Mars in the 2030s is still NASA’s goal.
Mars

Left: Mars Pathfinder explores the rocky surface of the Red¬Planet   NEWS FROM MARS Renewable energy on Mars Renewable power is a little bit tricky on Mars, which is farther from the Sun, has dust storms and has no tides. What it does have, however, is wind, and so scientists from Delft University of Technology have come up with the excellent idea of designing robots to fly huge power-generating kites in the Martian atmosphere. “Despite the low density of the Martian atmosphere, wind speeds are high enough to make wind energy competitive with nuclear power in terms of power produced per unit mass,” the scientists wrote in a research paper. One kite could generate 127 megawatt-hours of energy per year, the scientists say, enough to power five households in the US. The assembly, which will also have solar panels – though Mars gets only 43 per cent of the sunlight we enjoy on Earth – will catch the wind and be reeled out, performing a series of tacking manoeuvres to maximise its speed and pulling force. This is all controlled by a robot that steers the wing-like kite, changing its angle of attack. Once the cable is pulled out, the kite can be dropped to minimise the pull as it’s reeled back in, ready to fly again.

Oxygen on Mars
The atmosphere on Mars is thin and not conducive to effective human breathing. It’s a hostile environment, and any astronauts who explore there will need to take their own oxygen. If humans are to build an outpost on the planet, however, they need a way of generating their own oxygen, which is also a critical component of rocket fuel. NASA estimates that to get four astronauts back from Mars would take about 25 tonnes of the gas. Enter the Mars Oxygen In-Situ Resource Utilization Experiment (MOXIE), carried aboard NASA’s Perseverance rover. This uses 300 watts of power to heat carbon dioxide from the Martian atmosphere, where it strips the oxygen atoms away from the carbon and sends the resulting carbon monoxide back outside. During its first test in April, it created just over five grams of oxygen in an hour, which is about ten minutes of breathing for an astronaut. MOXIE is just a demonstrator, but larger, more powerful versions of it could one day produce enough oxygen for a colony.

Ingenuity wobbles, but flies on The small robotic helicopter carried by NASA’s Perseverance rover made its sixth flight across the Martian surface near the end of May, but it was a flight marked by control disruptions and power spikes. The helicopter was asked to climb to ten metres (33 feet) above the surface before flying to the west to take stereoscopic images of a region of interest there. It had been flying for 54 seconds when a glitch was noticed in the stream of images coming from the navigation camera. Only one image was lost, but this led to the following images being delivered with inaccurate timestamps. Ingenuity uses an algorithm to navigate that uses both visual data about where things are and timestamps to tell it when it saw¬them.
As a result, Ingenuity began adjusting its velocity and tilting back and forth in an oscillating pattern, and this behaviour persisted for the rest of the flight. It encountered roll and pitch excursions of more than 20 degrees, large control corrections and spikes in power consumption. Despite this, the robotic aircraft was able to land within five metres (16.5 feet) of its intended location.

© NASA
